So previously, we have talked about back projections on
X-rays and you did an exercise where you reconstructed
a 2D slice by accumulating
intensity values through summing up the values from projections taken at multiple angles.
But what are those values?
It turns out that they are quite meaningful and even have a name.
As we have seen, a CT scanner measures the attenuation of X-rays,
which largely depends on
the physical density of the material that rays are passing through.
Back projection process allows us to compute
values that represent attenuation at a very specific point in space,
as we have seen in our exercise.
Because the rate of rotation is known and the rate of
attenuation by different types of tissues is also known,
these values are typically calibrated so that zero
corresponds to attenuation of water and the rest of the values
fall into the range of roughly minus 1,000-1,000
and represent physical density of the matter in relation to that of water.
These calibrated values are called Hounsfield units or CT numbers.
Their range can be represented with a scale where zero is water,
air is roughly minus 1,000.
Denser bones sits in the range of 500-1000,
and soft tissues are in between.
When such images are shown on the screen,
the Hounsfield unit values need to be mapped to a linear scale of
displayable colors and typically the grayscale is chosen for that.
So to sum it up, in this section,
we have learned about the basic principles of operation of CT scanners.
Key thing to remember here is that CT images are quite easy to start with
because they are quite consistent and we have the beauty of Hounsfield scale,
which allows us to infer the nature of tissue by just looking at pixel values.
CT scans are acquired one slice at a time,
thus there is a notion of primary acquisition plane.
CT images are acquired from raw digital data through a process called reconstruction.
This potentially can spawn
some interesting machine learning problems
related to direct processing of signer grim data,
either for some clinical purpose or for
the purpose of improving the reconstruction quality.
In the next section, we will learn about MR scanners and what
makes imaging with them less consistent but much more versatile.